PR: Create Reviewer Guidelines (#16789)
spyder-ide/spyder: REVIEW.md

# Reviewer Guidelines

Reviewing pull requests (PRs) can take many forms and be reflected across many styles.
To help make the process more clear for contributors, the following guidelines are designed to scope review and specify what areas of feedback block PRs from merging.

> **Note:** These guidelines are new; feedback on them is appreciated and can be given via [issue to the main spyder repo](https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/issues).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** These guidelines are new; feedback on them is appreciated and can be given via [opening an issue on the main Spyder repo](https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/issues/new/choose).
```

This change got lost in the merge (which I realized after I got a sense of deja vu making it, heh), so I made it again

### Expected reviewer behavior

Pull requests are a key space for community interaction, and reviewing PRs is a vital part of maintaining any project.
With that in mind, this is a process that can benefit from having a clear set of goals for the sake of both the reviewer and the PR author.

All reviewers are expected to follow these guidelines and labels in their review.
If a reviewer forgets, they may be reminded.
If a reviewer refuses, they will be contacted about a violation of [Spyder’s Code of Conduct](https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) under `Giving and gracefully accepting constructive feedback`.
As with all aspects of the Code of Conduct, this applies to everyone involved in the discussion (including members of the Spyder organization on GitHub).

Other notes:
- Unless the reviewer has explicit permission on the conversation for that PR, reviewers should not commit to the same branch as the PR being reviewed.
- If more than roughly 20% of review comments fall in the `[optional]` section described below, then it is worth adding this feedback in an issue linked to the PR instead of on the PR directly.

> - When possible, please add comments asking for a specific change as [GitHub suggestions](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/reviewing-changes-in-pull-requests/commenting-on-a-pull-request#adding-line-comments-to-a-pull-request).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Whenever practical, reviewers should add comments asking for a specific change as [GitHub suggestions](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/reviewing-changes-in-pull-requests/commenting-on-a-pull-request#adding-line-comments-to-a-pull-request).
```

Tweak the language a bit to emphasize this a bit while relaxing the constraint to practicability rather than simply possibility

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If after discussion, an author and a reviewer still don't agree on a change and can't come up with a solution that addresses the concerns of both parties, another maintainer of the repository in question (or if not available, another Spyder core developer) should be pinged to give a second opinion and mediate the disagreement.

```

Suggested an addition to address @dalthviz 's [comment](https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/pull/16789#discussion_r746874605); @dalthviz how does this sound to you?

Author: I think this is good, but I'd like to hear from others before I commit it!

Author: We met and got agreement from @dalthviz, @steff456, and @CAM-Gerlach to try this option. It can still be commented on.

## Reviewing process

### For code-focused review

> #### Required review

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Required items
```

Avoid repetition

> The following are areas of review the community expects to be covered in the review of every PR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following are areas the community expects to be covered in the review of the code on each PR.
```

Avoid repetition and add necessary qualifier, and sound a little softer (missed this before, sorry)

> Not all of the following questions will be relevant for every PR (for example, a bug fix may not need to answer the same questions as a proposal for a new feature), but these are the themes to be addressed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not all of the following individual questions will be relevant for every PR (for example, a bug fix may not need to answer the same questions as a proposal for a new feature), but these are the themes to be addressed.
```

Distinguish this a bit more clearly from the above (otherwise, on the surface they might read a little contradictory)

> Review that addresses these questions on a PR will be prefixed with `[required]` so that the PR author(s) are clear that they are blockers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Just so we all keep track, see the [discussion](https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/pull/16789#discussion_r747183383) about this line (and more specifically the docs one).

PR authors are responsible for addressing required reviews for the PR to be eligible for merging.

- [ ] Motivation
    - Do we want this?
    - Would it benefit a meaningful number of users to have this accepted into Spyder?
    - Does it help to solve bugs?
    - Is it a necessary refactoring?

- [ ] Tests
    - Do the tests pass in the continuous integration build?
      If appropriate, help the contributor understand why tests failed.
    - Are regression tests needed?
      If a reproducible bug is being fixed in this PR, one may be needed, and reviewers should help the contributor design and implement them.
      In case the contributor is unable to add the test, the reviewer should do so in a follow-up PR.

 - [ ] Sustainability and maintenance
    - Is the code easy to read and low on redundancy?
    - Should variable names be improved for clarity or consistency?
    - Should comments or docstrings be added or removed?
    - Will the cost of maintaining a new feature be worth its benefits?
    - Will the new code add any dependencies on other projects?

- [ ] User-facing changes
    - What use cases might this change influence?

>     - Does the user experience match existing patterns in Spyder?
>       If it does not, why was the choice made?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Looks like this was duplicated here along with below, possibly due to the merge conflict?

    - Is in-interface text (new or modified) appropriately descriptive and free of spelling or grammar issues that would make its meaning unclear?

> #### Optional review

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Optional items
```

To match above

- [ ] Improvements
    - Could the code easily be rewritten to run much more efficiently for relevant settings?
    - Is the code backwards compatible with previous versions?
      (Or is a deprecation cycle necessary?)
    - Is there feedback that would be helpful for solving future issues surrounding this change?
      Are there non-urgent concerns that the team should be made aware of?
    - If a bug is fixed, does the PR include a non-regression test?
    - Are there images that should be added, resized or optimized?

- [ ] User-facing changes
    - Does the user interface or other visual elements match existing patterns in Spyder?
      If it does not, is there a reason?

Review that addresses these questions on a PR will be prefixed with `[optional]` so that the PR author(s) are clear that this feedback is not a blocker.
Addressing this feedback is considered above-and-beyond, and may be more relevant on some PRs than others.
PR authors may address these reviews, but are not required to do so in order for the PR to be eligible for merging.

### For documentation/website-focused review

> #### Required review

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Required items
```

As above

The following are areas the community expects to be covered in the review of a documentation-focused PR.
In general, reviewers need to consider whether the content is a good fit, accurate and generally clear to readers, and builds and renders with no simmediate user-visible issues.

> Review that addresses these questions on a PR will be prefixed with `[required]` so that the PR author(s) are clear that they are blockers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Just so we all keep track, see the [discussion](https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/pull/16789#discussion_r747183383) about this line (and the one above).

Author: I haven't included these suggestions because I think they undermine the rest of the guidelines. I mentioned more in the linked discussion.

Reviewer: Sorry, I didn't mean to imply you should make this with with the rest, just left this here for tracking purposes if we do decide to implement the proposal there. My mistake; really sorry about the confusion.

**Motivation**

- [ ] Does the change improve the documentation?
- [ ] Would it benefit a meaningful number of users to have this as a part of the documentation?
- [ ] Is it appropriate for the documentation and the section it is placed in?

**Content**

- [ ] Is the information accurate?
- [ ] Is the change sufficiently complete, such that it won’t confuse users if it were to appear in the documentation as-is?
- [ ] Is it clear what the text and images are trying to communicate?

**Images/GIFs**

- [ ] Are screenshots/GIFs reasonably legible and appropriate for the topic?
- [ ] Are all images/GIFs scaled and optimized?
      If needed, reviewers should offer to help with this.

**Technical**

- [ ] Do the tests pass in the continuous integration build?
      If appropriate, help the contributor understand why tests failed.
- [ ] Does any added/changed content render correctly, without user-visible issues?
- [ ] Is the content free from typos and unambiguous grammar errors (review the [Style Guide](https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder-docs/blob/master/STYLEGUIDE.md) for more information)?

> #### Optional review

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Optional items
```

As above

    - Do we want this?
    - Would it benefit a meaningful number of users to have this accepted into Spyder?
    - Does it help to solve bugs?
    - Is it a necessary refactoring?

- [ ] Tests
    - Do the tests pass in the continuous integration build?
      If appropriate, help the contributor understand why tests failed.
    - Are regression tests needed?
      If a reproducible bug is being fixed in this PR, one may be needed, and reviewers should help the contributor design and implement them.
      In case the contributor is unable to add the test, the reviewer should do so in a follow-up PR.

 - [ ] Sustainability and maintenance
    - Is the code easy to read and low on redundancy?
    - Should variable names be improved for clarity or consistency?
    - Should comments or docstrings be added or removed?
    - Will the cost of maintaining a new feature be worth its benefits?
    - Will the new code add any dependencies on other projects?

- [ ] User-facing changes
    - What use cases might this change influence?
    - Is in-interface text (new or modified) appropriately descriptive and free of spelling or grammar issues that would make its meaning unclear?

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

In addition to requested changes, this category also includes questions that the reviewer has for the contributor that may relate to one of these areas, or otherwise need to be answered before the PR can be merged.

```

- [ ] Improvements
    - Could the code easily be rewritten to run much more efficiently for relevant settings?
    - Is the code backwards compatible with previous versions?
      (Or is a deprecation cycle necessary?)
    - Is there feedback that would be helpful for solving future issues surrounding this change?
      Are there non-urgent concerns that the team should be made aware of?
    - If a bug is fixed, does the PR include a non-regression test?
    - Are there images that should be added, resized or optimized?

- [ ] User-facing changes
    - Does the user interface or other visual elements match existing patterns in Spyder?
      If it does not, is there a reason?

Review that addresses these questions on a PR will be prefixed with `[optional]` so that the PR author(s) are clear that this feedback is not a blocker.
Reviews may be tagged per comment or through the primary comment of a GitHub review.
Addressing this feedback is considered above-and-beyond, and may be more relevant on some PRs than others.
PR authors may address these reviews, but are not required to do so in order for the PR to be eligible for merging.

#### Discussion items

> I am not sure what people want for the discussion items tag, so this is a placeholder to make space for collaboration.

Author: @ccordoba12 @CAM-Gerlach You were the main two people that I think requested this additional tag (based on my notes). I'm not sure what you think fits here, so I'd like your input if possible.

Author: Commenting just to get some attention on this again. I think this section being empty is the only thing stopping this from being voted on. (Unless I'm misunderstanding.)

Author: One more comment for notifications and then I'll stop. I think it would be great to get this done and vote (as mentioned below) so we know what actions we're taking in the new year. Thanks!

Reviewer 2: My suggestion for this section

> Reviewers can leave comments marked with the `[discussion]` tag (preferably), or not marked with any tag, to ask for clarifications from the contributor, suggest that some details of the implementation could be improved in the future, indicate that a test would be nice to have, or any other hint that could help the contributor or other reviewers to better understand the context of the proposed work. Contributors are not required to answer or address those comments as part of the review process.

Reviewer 2: @CAM-Gerlach, what are you thoughts about this?

Reviews may be tagged per comment or through the primary comment of a GitHub review.
PR authors are responsible for addressing requested reviews for the PR to be eligible for merging.

**Motivation**

- [ ] Does the change improve the documentation?
- [ ] Would it benefit a meaningful number of users to have this as a part of the documentation?
- [ ] Is it appropriate for the documentation and the section it is placed in?

**Content**

- [ ] Is the information accurate?
- [ ] Is the change sufficiently complete, such that it won’t confuse users if it were to appear in the documentation as-is?
- [ ] Is it clear what the text and images are trying to communicate?

**Images/GIFs**

- [ ] Are screenshots/GIFs reasonably legible and appropriate for the topic?
- [ ] Are all images/GIFs scaled and optimized?
      If needed, reviewers should offer to help with this.

**Technical**

- [ ] Do the tests pass in the continuous integration build?
      If appropriate, help the contributor understand why tests failed.
- [ ] Does any added/changed content render correctly, without user-visible issues?
- [ ] Is the content free from typos and unambiguous grammar errors?

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

In addition to requested changes, this category also includes questions that the reviewer has for the contributor that may relate to one of these areas, or otherwise need to be answered before the PR can be merged.

```

# Reviewer Guidelines

Reviewing pull requests (PRs) can take many forms and be reflected across many styles.
To help make PR review more clear for contributors, the following guidelines are designed to scope review and specify what areas of feedback block PRs from merging.

## Contents

[Feedback](#feedback)

[Expected reviewer behavior](#expected-reviewer-behavior)

[For code-focused review](#for-code-focused-review])
- [Required review](#required-review)
- [Optional review](#optional-review)

[For documentation-focused review](#for-documentation-focused-review)
- [Required review](#required-review-1)
- [Optional review](#optional-review-1)
- [Followup-only items](#followup-only-items)
- [Rebasing and merging](#rebasing-and-merging)

[Communication Guidelines](#communication-guidelines)

> [References](#references)

Reviewer: I'd strongly advise against (apparently) manually creating and updating a hardcoded table of contents like this. No other document in the Spyder repo has one, even those longer and more complex than this one, whereas GitHub already generates a one automatically (albeit one that could be a bit more discoverable, though we could simply call it out in the text) that can be browsed and searched by clicking the icon in the top-left corner of the document.

Generating and maintaining one without automated tooling support, instead of simply using the existing header structure, is a nightmare to maintain, as not only is it easy to drift out of sync with the actual document if any headings are added, removed or re-organized, but the links will also invisibly break (in addition to just being out of date) if any of the headers are renamed, or even (in some cases) are re-ordered. 

The simplest solution for now is just relying on the GitHub one, as we do for all other such Markdown files here, and if more visibility is needed, we can just explicitly call it out in the text in lieu of duplicating the whole thing. However, if for whatever reason we do need one in the text itself, there are a number of better ways to achieve this; for the docs, website and other repos, we use DocToC via Pre-Commit, which automatically generates and updates the ToCs automatically as needed whenever users commit new changes to the file.

Author: I've removed this section per request.

Some things I'd like to note anyways:
- I'm not actually sure what autogenerated GitHub table of contents you mean, so I'm just trusting you here.
- I think the fact that other Spyder documents lack this is not a reason to continue creating difficult-to-navigate documents.
- This doesn't matter to me enough to block the PR on keeping the table of contents. Iteration is welcome.

Reviewer: As mentioned, its not as obvious as it could be, if you want we can explicitly call it out in the text, but here's what I was referring to:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/17051931/143012237-daee7438-0bbb-4d34-9c4d-65f022858e59.png)

> I think the fact that other Spyder documents lack this is not a reason to continue creating difficult-to-navigate documents.

I certainly don't think this should be so either, and in fact on all the Spyder repos that I'm the primary maintainer of (website, docs, theme, etc) we have a pre-commit hook that autogenerates and updates an explicit in-text table of contents on all documents longer than a page or two, but I do think that makes it out of scope for this PR and more appropriate for a dedicated one that it applies it to all, if needed. As a much simpler solution for now, we can call specific attention to the GitHub-generated ToC in the text instead of manually duplicating it.

> [References](#references)

Author: It's been removed, as requested in another comment.

## Feedback!

These guidelines are new; feedback on them is appreciated and can be given via [issue to the main spyder repo](https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/issues).

## Expected reviewer behavior

Pull requests are a key space for community interaction, and reviewing PRs is a vital part of maintaining any project.
Reviewing PRs is also a skill that can benefit from having a clear set of goals for the sake of the reviewer and the PR author.

All reviewers are expected to follow these guidelines and labels in their review.
If a reviewer forgets, they may be reminded.
If a reviewer refuses, they will be contacted about a violation of [Spyder’s Code of Conduct](https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/blob/b672a739d068005e384eddb92190831fea2f760a/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) under `Giving and gracefully accepting constructive feedback`.
As with all aspects of the Code of Conduct, this applies to everyone involved in the discussion (including members of the Spyder organization on GitHub).

> Other notes:

Author: Added in line 43. Good idea, thanks.

> Other notes:

Reviewer: Thanks! I'll follow up there.

> Other notes:

Reviewer: Thanks! I have a minor tweak but otherwise looks great.

- Unless the reviewer has explicit permission on the conversation for that PR, reviewers should not commit to the same branch as the PR being reviewed.

> - If more than roughly 20% of review comments fall in the `[optional]` section described below, then it is worth adding this feedback in an issue linked to the PR instead of on the PR directly.

Reviewer: Looks like this might have gotten lost in the merge conflict?

> - If more than roughly 20% of review comments fall in the `[optional]` section described below, then it is worth adding this feedback in an issue linked to the PR instead of on the PR directly.

Reviewer: Sorry, I forgot to mark this as unresolved—my mistake! Looks like this is still outstanding; it got applied prior to the merge conflict but then accidentally got lost.

    - Are regression tests needed?
      If a reproducible bug is being fixed in this PR, it may be needed and reviewers can help the contributor design and implement them.
      In case the contributor is unable to add the test, the reviewer should add it in a follow-up PR.

 - [ ] Sustainability and maintenance
    - Is the code easy to read and low on redundancy?
    - Should variable names be improved for clarity or consistency?
    - Should comments or docstrings be added?
    - Should comments be removed as unhelpful or extraneous?
    - Will the cost of maintaining a new feature be worth its benefits?
    - Will the new code add any dependencies on other projects?

- [ ] User-facing changes
    - What use cases might this change influence?
    - Does the user experience match existing patterns in Spyder?
      If it does not, why was the choice made?
    - Is in-interface text (new or modified) appropriately descriptive and free of spelling or grammar issues that would make its meaning unclear?

Review that addresses these questions on a PR will be prefixed with `[required]` so that the PR author(s) are clear that they are blockers.

> PR authors are responsible for addressing these reviews if prompted by the reviewer in order for that PR to be eligible for merging.

Reviewer: Implemented, thanks!

### Optional review

The following are themes that may be helpful to cover on a PR, but are optional.

> **Note**: The difference between an objective improvement and a subjective preference isn’t always clear.

Reviewer 3: Thinking about this phrase, should a section exists to provide guidance when a review/PR gets stuck since the PR author and reviewer don't come to a conclusion of what is the end form of the PR? (mainly in situations where author and reviewer are both core developers). Maybe something like suggesting pinging someone else to check the review and PR context or other ways to come with a conclusion of what needs to be done.

Reviewer: This is pretty standard procedure (happens with me, @ccordoba12 and @dalthviz all the time) but it would be good to codify it somewhere. Since it applies to any PR, and either optional or required changes, I think it would make sense to go in a top-level section; adding it as one or more bullets in the Communication Guidelines section would probably be ideal, since several of the bullets there already touch on related issues.

Also, as a corollary, at least in my experience with core developers reviewing the PR of other core devs, there are often cases where the reviewer isn't sure of something/is asking a question, and others where the reviewer raises an issue or asks for a change that ends up not actually being applicable; in fact, I'd say that one of these ends up being case with nearly 1/2 of all the comments of core dev PRs I'm involved in either as an author or reviewer, with many if not most of those just being mistakes/misunderstandings rather than actually differences of opinion.

Everyone makes mistakes sometimes and no one is perfect, and we always have the chance to learn something new from others, no matter their level of experience. Labeling review items as "required", I think, carries with it the implication that the reviewer is correct by default, which is certainly not always the case even on new contributor PRs. As such, I'd suggest rethinking this framing a bit, which I'll address more directly in a comment on my followup review.

Reviewer: Hey @isabela-pf Would you like @dalthviz or myself to propose some specific language here?

Reviewer: I proposed a [suggestion](https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/pull/16789#discussion_r755516108) to hopefully address this; let me know what you think!

- [ ] Improvements
    - Could the code easily be rewritten to run much more efficiently for relevant settings?
    - Is the code backwards compatible with previous versions?
      (Or is a deprecation cycle necessary?)
    - Is there feedback that would be helpful for solving future issues surrounding this change?
      Are there non-urgent concerns that the team should be made aware of?
    - If a bug is fixed, does the PR include a non-regression test?
    - Are there images that should be added?
      Are there images that should be resized or optimized in another way?

- [ ] User-facing changes
    - Does the user interface or other visual elements match existing patterns in Spyder?
      If it does not, is there a reason?

Review that addresses these questions on a PR will be prefixed with `[optional]` so that the PR author(s) are clear that this feedback is not a blocker.
Addressing this feedback is considered above-and-beyond, and may be more relevant on some PRs than others.
PR authors may address these reviews, but are not required to do so in order for the PR to be eligible for merging.

> ## For documentation-focused review

Author: I've updated the title based on a suggestion you made (that I missed) in a prior document. Does that address this comment?

> ## For documentation-focused review

Reviewer: You didn't miss it haha; I just made it too late in the process—my bad.

I actually somewhat revised my thinking on it since then; part of me is favoring something like ``For prose-focused review`` as that more concisely, broadly and appropriately captures the range of potential PRs (and parts thereof) which it applies to. However, on the other hand, that would require some pretty significant rewriting of a fair bit of the text below, versus just adding website a smattering of places where documentation is mentioned (which is all it currently needs now in that case).

> ## For documentation-focused review

Reviewer: Given that, to avoid dragging this out further, and that I myself am not sure what if anything we should do further, maybe best to just leave this for now.

In general, reviewers need to consider whether the content is a good fit, accurate and generally clear to readers, and builds and renders with no simmediate user-visible issues.

**Motivation**

- [ ] Does the change improve the documentation?
- [ ] Would it help multiple users to have this as a part of the documentation?
- [ ] Is it appropriate for the documentation and the section it is placed in?

**Content**

- [ ] Is the information accurate?
- [ ] Is the change complete, such that it won’t confuse users if it were to appear in the documentation as-is?
- [ ] Is it clear what the text and images are trying to communicate?

**Images/GIFs**

- [ ] Are screenshots/GIFs reasonably legible and appropriate for the topic?
- [ ] Are all images/GIFs scaled and optimized?
If needed, reviewers should offer to help with this.

**Technical**

- [ ] Do the tests pass in the continuous integration build?
If appropriate, help the contributor understand why tests failed.
- [ ] Does any added/changed content render correctly, without user-visible issues?

> - [ ] Is the content free from typos and unambiguous grammar errors (review the [Style Guide](https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder-docs/blob/master/STYLEGUIDE.md) for more information)?

Author: I don't think `unambiguous grammar errors`are quite as unambiguous to many people, so I was trying to provide literally any context for the statement. If you have another link that describes what kind of errors this includes, that would be great. 

I am a native english speaker (lowercase e is intentional), and I'm not certain what kind of feedback this statement entitles reviewers to, so I think there's a chance it's unclear to others as well. However, I don't want this PR to stay in review for much longer, so if there is no other resource I can restore the unlinked version.

> - [ ] Is the content free from typos and unambiguous grammar errors (review the [Style Guide](https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder-docs/blob/master/STYLEGUIDE.md) for more information)?

Reviewer: Basically, if English were in a programming language, syntax (grammar) that would produce an error (i.e not following the grammar, capitalization, spelling and punctuation rules of the language, e.g. "This is a comma splice, this is a comma splice too"), or semantics (meaning) that is clearly ambiguous (see [examples](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_linguistic_example_sentences#Ambiguity)) or not the intended behavior (i.e. saying something different from what you mean, e.g. accidentally writing "Spyder isn't a great IDE" if the opposite was meant). This contrasts with issues of diction, phrasing, verbosity, repetition, etc that make the text harder to read and understand but not unambiguously incorrect (in language or meaning), style conventions, consistency issues, awkward or unidiomatic but not incorrect or clearly ambiguous syntax, formatting matters, or other items enumerated and described in the section below.

For the purpose of these docs, the AP style guide serves as the final authoritative reference for these matters (as mentioned in the style guide). However, while essentially all of its important rules can be found scattered around a large variety of unofficial third party online resources (and practically speaking, Googling it is the approach someone would take if they weren't sure of something—even myself, I suppose, if that ever were to become necessary, rather than digging out my old copy of AP), like all the common style guides access to guide itself requires a subscription, printed copy, etc, so there's no one place to link to.

In practice (ultimately, like almost any of these points if you drill down far enough), this comes down to an reviewer's best judgement in good faith on the basis of their knowledge, expertise and experience that something is a syntax error, lexical ambiguity or semantic mistake. In the extraordinary case that a reviewer was acting in bad faith and engaged in a large-scale, systemic, purposeful effort to claim style issues were grammar errors, other reviewer(s) with relevant expertise in this area would inherently be able to pick up on it, and cross-referencing a representative sample of cases with third party resources would serve to confirm it. But this sort of malfeasance would be wholly unprecedented in the history of the project and completely out of character of anyone I'd hope we would consider accepting as a member.

> I am a native english speaker (lowercase e is intentional)

Could you explain a little more what you mean to imply here? I'm afraid I don't quite grasp it, sorry. At least by its own capitalization rules, as a proper noun, English is always capitalized. Is there an emerging, not-yet-standardized usage here that I'm yet unaware of? Or is this intended to make a point that I'm not picking up on?

> - [ ] Is the content free from typos and unambiguous grammar errors (review the [Style Guide](https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder-docs/blob/master/STYLEGUIDE.md) for more information)?

Reviewer: With all of that said (at perhaps too great length), perhaps there is something you can distill out of that which would be helpful here to alleviate your concerns?

> Review that addresses these questions on a PR will be prefixed with `[required]` so that the PR author(s) are clear that they are blockers.

Reviewer: I very deliberately chose not to include line this in this section (and would recommend reframing or removing it in the code-focused review section as well), for a number of reasons.

Most importantly, I feel having to tag (almost every, at least in most cases on the docs going forward) review comment/suggestion as `[required]` is not friendly very toward contributors, in several ways. Labeling suggestions as "required" carries with it the implicit presumption that the reviewer's judgement is inherently correct, the contributor is not and they _must_ make the change. This is certainly not always the case even on new contributor PRs, and might dissuade them or intimidate them against questioning it, even if they might think they have a clear reason (and end up being right).

Furthermore, it may not be appropriate or send the desired message for a large fraction of comments and in fact make reviews sound much more harsh than reviewers intend them to, particularly in the case of the large fraction of comments where the reviewer is varying degrees of unsure about the change they are proposing and wants to make that, and that they value the contributor's feedback, clear. Or, they may even want to frame it as a nuetral question to begin with—a much softer and more inclusive approach, that a prominent `[required]` tag can detract from. All told, comments that fall into one of these categories can sometimes comprise nearly half of all the comments on many of those I've been involved in lately. See [my comment above](https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/pull/16789#discussion_r747120076) for more background on that.

In addition to that, a required `[required]` tag has several other downsides, without much clear advantage. Given the large to overwhelming majority of allowed comments would include it, it makes for a greater learning curve, tedious work, and more mental energy for the reviewer to add to each one. Furthermore, it increases the verbosity, "noiseness" and complexity of the review for the contributor, requiring more time and energy to read. Finally, perhaps most importantly, just tagging the `[optional]` review comments makes it much easier for both reviewers and authors to spot at a glance whether a certain comment is optional or not, given both tags look visually similar and its much quicker to scan for tag/no tag than to parse the specific word in the tag, and also draws more attention to the fact that optional comments are optional as opposed to required comments are required, creating a more postitive overall impression.

Reviewer 4: I agree with @cam-gerlach's sentiments. It will become quite tedious to require `[required]` or `[optional]` tags for most or all comments. It is my understanding that PRs generally are blocked until all review conversations are marked as resolved; perhaps that is not correct. Does this obviate the need for tags? If a review conversation is satisfactorily resolved, then it gets clicked as resolved. Whether the suggestion is "optional" or "required" seems to me to depend on the reviewers vigor which would manifest in his or her persistence in keeping/reopening the conversation.

Reviewer: @mrclary I believe the intended benefit of `[optional]` tags are to make clear up front if a request is one that the reviewer would like to see implemented is not a blockers to merging the PR if the contributor is unable to implement it right away, to avoid the user being too intimidated and feeling the reviewer is asking too much of them, while giving reviewers more freedom to suggest a reasonable number of value-added changes with less worry of scaring off the contributor. There have been cases where I've actually wanted something like this, e.g. for additions/improvements to GIFs on the docs, or requesting that they cover a related case, and in the past too for improvements on Spyder code PRs, e.g. adding more detailed tests (beyond the minimum) or refactoring something.

I actually don't disagree with adding (only) `[optional]` tags, as they lack most of the aforementioned downsides of `[required]` tags, are inherently scoped to only be needed/desired in a limited number of specific cases, and would be a more a tool to enable clear communication between the reviewer and author rather than a bureaucratic requirement.

The problem, evidently, with relying on the "reviewers vigor" is that, for very _vigorous_ reviewers like myself who tend to review PRs very thoroughly, it can evidently be too intimidating for some newer contributors (even in the case of all review comments being made as one-click suggestions that don't require any conversation or manual resolution). The purpose of this PR is to limit and codify the review process to avoid these situations in the future. While its unfortunate that a relatively small minority of cases requires an additional burden of restrictions to be applied to all reviewers acting in good faith, given the outsize harm caused by those incidents to all involved, it will hopefully at least be a net nuetral long term, particularly taking an approach that balances the needs of both authors and reviewers.

Author: I think if there's not interest in labeling feedback, I'm not sure what else these documents/guidelines do. I guess they explicitly state the scope of review that (from my understanding) reviewers are already following? 

And to be clear, that's okay! This is a proposal the team is not required to accept.

Reviewer: Hey, sorry if I was unclear. I _agree_ with the making the distinction between optional and required changes, and I _agree_ with the guidance that reviewers should clearly mark optional improvements as `[optional]`. The only part I felt was particularly burdensome and potentially harmful was mandating that all non-optional comments be explicitly labelled as `[required]`, which is also the remaining provision that requires the biggest change to reviewer practice and something I haven't seen successfully used on other projects. @mrclary , does that sufficiently resolve your concerns, or do you feel there are more fundamental issues with the current approach as proposed by this PR?

> PR authors are responsible for addressing these reviews if prompted by the reviewer in order for that PR to be eligible for merging.

Reviewer: Thanks!

### Optional review

The following are themes that may be helpful to cover on a documentation-focused PR, but are optional.

> This may include feedback about non-blocking, substantive, user-visible content improvements to the text and images.

Author: I made this change, though I honestly am not clear on the difference between the two.

> This may include feedback about non-blocking, substantive, user-visible content improvements to the text and images.

Reviewer: Sorry for the confusion; the latter more clearly constraints the scope of what a reviewer should request as optional, while the former is more of a suggestion and treats what was intended to be the primarily determining factor as just an example.

> As with all optional review, please primarily consider how a PR would impact documentation stability, clarity, and quality over aiming for subjective improvements.

Reviewer: Looks like this one was lost in the merge as well?

> As with all optional review, please primarily consider how a PR would impact documentation stability, clarity, and quality over aiming for subjective improvements.

Reviewer: Sorry, I forgot to mark this as unresolved—my mistake! Looks like this is still outstanding; it got applied prior to the merge conflict but then accidentally got lost.

> This section should be used in limited amounts to avoid overtaxing contributors, but can be used judiciously with authors who’ve successfully contributed previous pull requests to documentation repositories.

Author: I still think this divides contributors by (perceived) skill level, something that isn't (and I don't think should be) quantifiable. Is there any reason this line can't be

```suggestion
Comments under this section should be used in limited amounts to avoid overloading authors and keep the pull request focused and in scope.
```

which is the revision without the mention of a subset of contributors?

> This section should be used in limited amounts to avoid overtaxing contributors, but can be used judiciously with authors who’ve successfully contributed previous pull requests to documentation repositories.

Reviewer: ### > I still think this divides contributors by (perceived) skill level, something that isn't (and I don't think should be) quantifiable

I'm not sure I see anywhere in my proposed revision that discusses skill level; in fact, I took pains to avoid referencing that. Rather, it simply concerns whether the contributor is newer to a repo and open source, which is readily quantifiable; not only can a reviewer's past contributions be browsed with one click to their profile, but first-time contributors to a repo get a special badge saying this on their PRs and any comment they make on them, for the [_explicit_ purpose of being extra welcoming to new contributors](https://github.blog/2017-07-25-making-it-easier-to-grow-communities-on-github/) following proven approaches of building healthy communities, while repeat contributors get a different one, and org members (core devs) get another still.

And this is all to say nothing of a reviewer's own direct personal experience of previously working with a contributor and what they responded particularly well to; for example, the most recent new contributor whose PRs I reviewed [enthusiastically _thanked_ me for providing such detailed feedback](https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder-docs/issues/297#issuecomment-934403011) and later promised to come back again. Implying that we, as human beings, cannot take these moments of joy and appreciation (for which I live for as a reviewer) into account simply because they cannot be reduced to a simple number is something I have trouble squaring with the compassionate, humanistic virtues espoused by the code of conduct, the very principles which this document ultimately seeks to reflect.

> Is there any reason this line can't be [...] which is the revision without the mention of a subset of contributors?

Yes, I'm afraid there is, because it reflects the very motivation of this entire effort in the first place. This document already necessarily strips reviewers of much of their good-faith discretion in favor of of a more prescriptive one-size-fits-all approach, to perhaps an equal or greater degree than I've seen in practice at other source projects I've contributed to. There is a balance between to be struck between the value of carefully considered reviewer judgement and that of codifying a universal set of rules requiring all contributors to be treated the same, and I believe taking this so far as to prohibit even a mention that reviewers should take _extra_ care and compassion when working with contributors who may be newer to the project or open source not only is not helpful to our ultimate goal here, but actively harmful to it.

More broadly, I feel a rigid mandate that the work of a user who openly states they are brand new to open source making their first ever contribution to the repository must be held to the same standards as a core dev team member who is paid to work on the project and with whom I have a years-long working relationship, and require the blunt instrument of an explicit escape hatch to consider otherwise, is contrary not only to the efficient and effective functioning of the project, but is actively unhelpful toward ensuring that newer contributors feel welcome and want to continue working with the project, rather than being overwhelmed and their specific needs as an individual not cared for and understood for the sake of following strict and unyielding rules. In fact, it was the uncompromising enforcement of the latter that got us into this situation in the first place, and that careful attention to the extra care suggested by my revision above might well have avoided altogether.

That said, perhaps it is I who have taken things to far. @mrclary , I know both I and @isabela-pf have really valued your input in other discussions, and your opinions are particularly insightful and thoughtfully considered. As someone who also participates in a fair amount of review, on both sides of the coin, what is your take on this?

> This section should be used in limited amounts to avoid overtaxing contributors, but can be used judiciously with authors who’ve successfully contributed previous pull requests to documentation repositories.

Reviewer: Or maybe its just 4 am and I've passed the point of cogent discourse :sleepy:

> This section should be used in limited amounts to avoid overtaxing contributors, but can be used judiciously with authors who’ve successfully contributed previous pull requests to documentation repositories.

Author: I still disagree, but you review PRs far more than me and manage the documentation/website. I'll commit this.

> This section should be used in limited amounts to avoid overtaxing contributors, but can be used judiciously with authors who’ve successfully contributed previous pull requests to documentation repositories.

Reviewer: I'm really sorry I went on a bit of a late night polemic (something these guidelines explicitly discourage and I should have paid more attention), and I don't want you to feel that my viewpoint should override yours simply because of my experience in one particular area.

I can understand the concerns you shared above about splitting contributors into different groups, which is why I heavily revised this section to try to eliminate that; I'm just trying to see how they still apply to a simple admonition advising reviewers to use extra restraint and care around new contributors, which I feel was the very mistake I made that resulted in this whole situation to begin with (and as a side note, as to the escape hatch, in that case I actually had asked the author for consent before reviewing, and she gave it, but that didn't prevent the worst from happening).

Review that addresses these topics on a PR will be prefixed with `[optional]` so that the PR author(s) are clear that this feedback is not a blocker.
Addressing this feedback is considered above-and-beyond, and may be more relevant on some PRs than others.
PR authors may address these reviews, but are not required to do so in order for the PR to be eligible for merging.

### Followup-only items

On all documentation PRs that modify more than a few lines, changes that are less critical/unambiguous, optimization-focused, or those that are not user-visible, should not be suggested on contributor PRs (even with an `[Optional]` tag) unless the author explicitly requests this level of review.

Instead, these changes should be made in a followup pull request by a maintainer or other reviewer.
The specifics are covered in detail in the [Style Guide](https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder-docs/blob/master/STYLEGUIDE.md), but generally include:

- [ ] Copyediting (diction, phrasing, verbosity, repetition etc)
- [ ] Formatting (spacing, line breaks, etc)
- [ ] reST/Markdown style (roles, directives, markup, etc)
- [ ] Style guide issues (consistency, precise label text, other nits)

> ### Rebasing and merging

Reviewer: @dalthviz and others, what is your take on promoting this to be a top-level section, as opposed to applying to some PRs and not others? Notably, it doesn't require that maintainers always squash PRs (or take other actions), it still leaves it to maintainer judgement, but clarifies the expectations and the tools maintainers have at their discretionary disposal to take care of such cases (as we discussed on spyder-ide/qtpy#277 )

Reviewer 3: Just in case, makes sense to me to have as contents/outline something like this:

* Ettiquete Guideline

   * Communication principles (current _Communication Guidelines_)
   * Expected reviewer behavior

* Reviewing process

   * For code-focused review
      * Required review
      * Optional review

   * For documentation-focused review
      * Required review
      * Optional review
      * Followup-only items
 
* Rebasing and merging process

* References

So basically the following flow: understanding how things should be done while reviewing (PR context, communication, etc), understanding what things should be reviewed and finally how to incorporate changes to the project after doing a review. 

Also, the _Feedback_ section/line could go in the description

However, keeping the current contents outline it could be nice to add a section under _For code-focused review_ specifing the rebasing/merging process in that case, so something like:

* Feedback

* Expected reviewer behavior

* Reviewing process

   * For code-focused review
      * Required review
      * Optional review
      * **Rebasing and merging process**

   * For documentation-focused review
      * Required review
      * Optional review
      * Followup-only items
      * Rebasing and merging process

* Communcation Guidelines

* References

Reviewer: I love @dalthviz 's idea, IMO that structure makes more sense and is less duplicative, simpler, clearer, and easier to navigate than the current.

Author: I've restructured the document to match what I think was described here. Thanks for taking a look at this from a high level, @dalthviz!

Reviewer: Thanks @isabela-pf ! Other than a few minor suggested tweaks, looks good to me.

# Reviewer Guidelines

Reviewing pull requests (PRs) can take many forms and be reflected across many styles.
To help make the process more clear for contributors, the following guidelines are designed to scope review and specify what areas of feedback block PRs from merging.

> **Note:** These guidelines have been merged contingent upon on a trial period until the end of May 2022 and cannot be enforced by the Code of Conduct until the next iteration of this document is posted; feedback on the guidelines is appreciated and can be given via [opening an issue on the main Spyder repo](https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/issues/new/choose).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** These guidelines have been merged for a trial period until the end of May 2022, and will not be enforced by the Code of Conduct until the next iteration of this document is posted.
Feedback on the guidelines is appreciated and can be given via [opening an issue on the main Spyder repo](https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/issues/new/choose).
```

* Separate into two sentences 
* Tweak the wording a few places to sound a little less awkward

# Reviewer Guidelines

> 

Author: I'd add a note at the top to state when these guidelines go into effect.

```suggestion

*Effective: [add merge date]*

```

Reviewer: I'd advise against this, as manually duplicating the metadata Git tracks automatically and GitHub displays prominently is widely considered a bad practice, as it adds overhead, imprecisely duplicates the canonical source of truth, and has the potential to get out of sync and mislead users, without any corresponding benefit.

The accurate merge date/time of the current version, localized to the user's regional format and timezone, is prominently displayed along with the other key metadata in a banner above the file, and the full history of when different versions went into effect and what changed is only a click away to anyone interested in this information.

Furthermore, the code of conduct and the other policies that see don't have this sort of header, and it comes across to me as rather bureaucratic, not exactly the spirit that FOSS projects typically embody.

Author: My concern is that people may look at existing PRs and be confused why this document says one thing and PRs do another. Yes, the date is stored by git, I just don't think it's exposed. I think it could be confusing in the transition.

This is not a blocker for me, though. We don't 100% need to include this.

Reviewer: Actually, it is exposed, as mentioned above. Here's how it looks for the code of conduct:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/17051931/141172973-eb07b41a-916b-4827-b80f-37ba8dc98afe.png)

In addition to the issues discussed previously, there was a recent thorny incident with a Quansight blog post that didn't get its publish date set correctly in the source on merging (since it happen right before), so even if someone remembers at some point to set the date, it makes merges much more tricky and easy to forget to update (especially since it either requires the author and the commiter to coordinate synchronously, or the committer to be a maintainer and (force) push the author's branch). And unlike a blog post, this dance will need to happen every time every time it is updated.

Reviewer 5: @CAM-Gerlach, I think is important to add the start date to keep track of when it started being effective in the repo. Also, I think we will never have to update it again, at least if we do change a lot this document.

Reviewer: Yeah, but as mentioned Git already tracks that and it is displayed just above the rendered document, and if we keep the date static, it may lead to the misleading impression that the _current_ version was published/effective on that date, which (particularly as time goes on and we revise it) may have substantially different requirements than this original.

Author: I don't think GitHub's UI puts it in a very visible place and there is always the chance that this document gets hosted outside of GitHub (though it's not linked to the docs right now). 

Still, I don't think this is critical so I'll close the suggestion. Thanks!

reviewer in order for that PR to be eligible for merging.

### Optional review

The following are themes that may be helpful to cover on a PR, but are optional. 

**Note**: The difference between an objective improvement and a subjective 
preference isn’t always clear. Reviewers should recall that code review is 
primarily about reducing risk in the project. When reviewing code, one should 
aim at preventing situations which may require a bug fix, a deprecation, or a 
retraction.

- [ ] Improvements
    - Could the code easily be rewritten to run much more efficiently for 
    relevant settings?
    - Is the code backwards compatible with previous versions? (Or is a 
    deprecation cycle necessary?)
    - Is there feedback that would be helpful for solving future issues 
    surrounding this change? Are there non-urgent concerns that the team 
    should be made aware of?
    - If a bug is fixed, does the PR include a non-regression test?
    - Are there images that should be added? Are there images that should be 
    resized or optimized in another way?

- [ ] User-facing changes
    - Does the user interface or other visual elements match existing patterns 

>     in Spyder? If it does not, is there a reason?

Author: Right now, this line is in both [required] and [optional] sections. I don't know where reviewers would like this to actually fall in terms of priorities.

Some thoughts:
- Having consistent UI patterns does help users navigate and use software more comfortably.
- Many UI choices will be made through Qt. Qt can be a difficult thing to manipulate for many contributors and may also be difficult for reviewers to guide contributors to.

Reviewer: @ccordoba12 @dalthviz @steff456 Thoughts?

Reviewer 5: I think it should be only in optional, like sometimes the effort to match in Qt may be really big, and sometimes it may be small. Which means that if something is really hard to implement in Qt maybe we can add a followup issue to try to not loose track of it.

Reviewer: I think this was resolved by moving this, aside from what appears to be an unintended duplication of this here again (see [suggestion](https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/pull/16789/files#r755547640)) perhaps due to the merge conflict?

offer to help with this.

**Technical**

- [ ] Do the tests pass in the continuous integration build? If appropriate, 
help the contributor understand why tests failed.
- [ ] Does any added/changed content render correctly, without user-visible 
issues?
- [ ] Is the content free from typos and unambiguous grammar errors (review 
the [Style Guide](https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder-docs/blob/master/STYLEGUIDE.md) 
for more information)?

Review that addresses these questions on a PR will be prefixed with 
`[required]` so that the PR author(s) are clear that they are blockers. PR 
authors are responsible for addressing these reviews if prompted by the 
reviewer in order for that PR to be eligible for merging.

### Optional review

The following are themes that may be helpful to cover on a 
documentation-focused PR, but are optional. This may include feedback about 
non-blocking, substantive, user-visible content improvements to the text and 
images. 

As with all optional review, please primarily consider how a PR would impact 
documentation stability, clarity, and quality over aiming for subjective 
improvements. This section should be used in limited amounts to avoid 

> overtaxing contributors, but can be used judiciously with authors who’ve 

Author: I'll admit I'm still concerned about creating any of these exception-y kind of loopholes that put contributors in different groups. I want to flag this for any further feedback.

The argument for this split:
Reviewers and contributors who have already been collaborating 
- may not be interested in extra steps of having optional review be limited or live in another issue or PR
- may have higher expectations for themselves and would like to get that feedback directly

The argument against this split:
- Allowing different rules/behavior for different people often leads conflict and abuse of these different rules (intentional or not)
- It's more difficult to hold people accountable when people are not all accountable for the same things when working on the same task.
- It's quite easy to be mistaken about where a contributor might fall in the spectrum of new to returning contributor.

Reviewer: It seems that the language should be clarified, and the substantial late-breaking changes that were made just before the PR was submitted arguably shift the meaning somewhat from what I actually intended, but the intent here was _not_ to provide a loophole for reviews of experienced contributors or create a dichotomous split in how PRs were treated, as seems to be the assumption above (that, indeed, is already controlled by the field we agreed to add in the PR template).

Rather, it was aimed at advising _additional_ restraint by reviewers (which is already beyond the level suggested in the equivalent "optional" section in the code-focused review guidelines) at suggesting changes even as "optional" that are within the relatively small number of areas and meet the other limitations mentioned, in cases of newer/less experienced contributors. The intent was to carefully limit requests for anything beyond the minimum required (that regardless of tag, the user may feel some pressure to implement), while still allowing for reviews to judiciously suggest optional improvements when there is a significant potential for net benefit to the project to do on the original PR.

Reviewer: I've heavily revised these lines to address this concern and make the intent above much more clear

- Whenever practical, reviewers should add comments asking for a specific change as [GitHub suggestions](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/reviewing-changes-in-pull-requests/commenting-on-a-pull-request#adding-line-comments-to-a-pull-request).
- If after discussion, an author and a reviewer still don't agree on a change and can't come up with a solution that addresses the concerns of both parties, another maintainer of the repository in question (or if not available, another Spyder core developer) should be pinged to give a second opinion and mediate the disagreement.

Reviewers may give context for the review to make sure the PR author is familiar with the style and this guide. 

For example,

> > In Spyder projects, we review pull requests by labelling which feedback needs to be addressed versus which feedback is optional. For more information, refer to the Review Guidelines in `REVIEW.md`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> In Spyder projects, we review pull requests by labeling which feedback needs to be addressed versus which feedback is optional. For more information, refer to the [Review Guidelines](https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/blob/master/REVIEW.md).
```

Fix typo and actually link reviewer guidelines
